FERMENTATION

1) What & How

Fermentation is a metabolic process that converts sugar to acids, gases, and/or alcohol. It occurs in yeast and bacteria, 
but also in oxygen-starved muscle cells, as in the case of lactic acid fermentation. 

Usual microorganisms used for fermentation:
bacteria (Lactobacillales - LAB), yeasts (Brettanomyces, Candida, Cryptococcus), and fungi 
(Actinomucor, Amylomyces, Aspergillus)

-> occurs naturally or by adding starter cultures

Starter cultures: 
preparations to assist the beginning of the fermentation process (grains, seeds, or nutrient liquids that have been well
colonized by the microorganisms used for the fermentation e.g. bread  for sourdough)
-makes the process faster

Reusable starters - once activated, are re-cultured by mixing a bit of a previous batch into a new one. 
Once the new batch is complete it becomes the starter for the next batch, and so on. 
(e.g. yoghurt – every time needs new batch of starter vs. kefir - reusable grains)


Stats:
- Fermented foods account for about one-third of world food consumption, and 20–40% (by weight) of individual diets.
- More than 5000 varieties of fermented foods and alcoholic beverages
- The three main groups of fermented foods are cereal products, beverages, and dairy products.

Fermentation – usually anaerobe (but also aerobe)

E.g. of products:
-milk products (animal milk -> butter, cheese, yoghurt, kefir)
-legumes / grains / cereals (soy beans -> soy sauce, miso, tempeh, cocoa beans - chocolate, coffee beans - coffee, wheat -> beer, bread)
-fruit (grapes -> wine, apple -> cider, apple, cherry, plum etc …-> fruit stews/compotes, + distillation: spirits)
-vegetable (cucumbers -> pickles, tomatoes, cabbage + onion -> kimchi/ sauerkraut, taro -> sapal)
-meat (cured pork -> bacon, ham; pork -> salami; fish -> fish sauces)
-alcohol (beer, wine, mead, cider, fruit spirits, gin, rum, vodka, whisky, sake)
-and also tea...

History: 
It is believed that one of the first transitions to organized food cultivation and production occurred in the Middle East,
in the valleys of the rivers Tigris and Euphrates, more than 10 millennia ago.

Why:
1. Enhanced nutritive value of fermented foods (fermentation degrades undesirable compounds and anti-nutritive factors; 
produces antioxidant components, provides biological enrichment of food substrates with essential amino acids, vitamins, 
and various bioactive compounds) -> “nutritionism” but done by non-expert

2. Improve digestibility and stimulate the probiotic functions (e.g. lactose intolerance - the sugars contained in fermented 
milks are broken down in the mammalian gut to monosaccharides, hence better digestible / kefir ferm. decreases lactose in milk)
=> major group of ‘functional foods'

3. Improved flavor
4. Preserve the perishable foods
5. New sources of food and reduce agricultural losses
6. Lead to discovery of new drugs and treatments of diseases
7. Fun & joy of tinkering
8. Cheap (booze)
