Starter Cultures:
A complex succession of bacteria often of ill-defined species and strain for production.
Lactic Acid Bacteria (LAB)
Bacteria that produce lactic acid as the major end product of carbohydrate metabolism. Acid tolerant.
The growth of LAB can be promoted by salt addition, also to suppress the spoilage flora.
 
Particular strains of LAB: Enterococcus, Lactobacillus, Lactococcus, Streptococcus, Tetragenococcus
 
LAB starters, can produce Bacteriocin (synthesized peptides) a protein which inhibits the growth of other bacteria.
 
Culture Formats –
Liquid cultures are easy to handle but have short shelf life
Deep frozen cultures are relatively easy to handle and have excellent storage stability. Frozen as pellet, it has to be shipped with dry ice and is therefore expensive
Lyophilized cultures also have good storage stability, can tolerate periods of ambient temperature but have to be rehydrated and lag phase
 
Performance Properties of Food Cultures –
Activity. Acidification activity??
Unit of activity to determine the size of the inoculum, time needed for fermentation and cost of the culture. ?????????
Phage Robustness
Bacteriophage is a virus attacking the bacterium. They generally poses no health risk for humans but will cause failure in the fermentation batches, which equals to economic loss.
The cheese industry is particularly vulnerable to phage infections.
 
Metabolism (chemical transformations)–
Determines the quality of the product and the speed of the fermentation process
Homolactic fermentation only produces lactic acid as the metabolic end product
Heterolactic fermentation produces are end products together with lactate and cultures containing heterolactic strains will have result in more flavourful fermented foods. Product will probably contain bubbles or holes in the case of cheeses.
Aspect of primary metabolism - depth of the fermentation before the microorganisms are inhibited by their own metabolites (by product of the metabolism process)
Alcoholic fermentations will determine the alcohol percentage and lactic fermentations will determine how low the final PH is
Metabolism also affects the texture of the fermented food.
 
Probiotics:
Probiotics are microorganisms that confer a health benefit on the host when ingested in adequate amounts.
 
Food Safety:
Metabolites produced during fermentation process contribute to the preservation of the foods. There are protective cultures with strong antimicrobial effects that are used to increase food safety and to extend the shelf life of products.
 
 
 
Molds Employed in Food Processing::
 
Two groups of molds, Septate and non-septate
Don’t contain chlorophyll and thus cannot synthesize essential organic compounds for growth. Has characteristics of a parasite and saprophyte (feeding off dead matter)
 
Require water, minerals and carbon and nitrogen sources for growth. Resistant to wide variations in environmental conditions. Growth of mold depends on the concentration and type of nitrogen salts. Sodium chloride concentration. Optimum growth temperature of molds is around 25 degrees, from 20-30. Also needs oxygen for growth, can also grow at low pH values (acidic)
 
Uses of mold –
Some cheeses are mold ripened, fermented foods such as soy sauce, miso, sonti, sake and tempeh uses mold to ferment.
The starter for soy sauce is usually a mixed culture carried from the previous lot.
 
Molds can be used for the production of many kinds of substances such as lactic, citric, aetic, gluconic …. Acids. Also used in production of antibiotics, vitamins, ethyl alcohol, amino acids and hormones. The most common would be citric acids, used in the industry to adjust the pH and develop the flavour and delay decolourisation and browning in meat and fruits. Molds also synthesize some enzymes used in manufacturing of foods.
 
Depending on the type of cheese, the molds can be applied by, adding to the brine, spreading it on the surface in a cold room, inoculating into curd before pressing and adding to the milk with starter culture.
 
Cheese Making and Starter Cultures::
Primary cultures and Secondary Cultures
Primary cultures – LAB
Secondary cultures – Combinations of bacteria, yeast, molds
 
Primary Cultures:
The LAB produce lactic acid from lactose(milk sugar)
Two types of starter cultures, mesophilic (activated with low temperatures) and thermophilic (high temperatures)
Also classified into mixed and defined cultures.
Mixed cultures are undefined and unknown numbers of strains
Mesophilic mixed cultures can be further classified into D, L and DL cultures.
Defined cultures are known strains. Usually isolates of mixed cultures.
 
Natural Whey cultures, sometimes called artisanal cultures.
 
Secondary Cultures:
Growth of mold is responsible for the fluffly white surface of Brie and Camembert and also blue cheese. Since they are aerobic, the blue cheeses are deliberately pierced.
 
Important properties of starter LAB
Proteolytic activity (the breakdown of proteins into smaller peptides and amino acids)
Bacteriocin Production and immunity
The first enzymes in lactose metabolism
Ability to transport citrate and resist attack from bacteriophage.
 
To prevent phage from contaminating the cheese production:
Bulk starter must be free of phage
Plant sanitation
Heat treatment for the medium used for growing the starter
Aseptic technique (sterilisation)
Chlorine as a use of phagicide

Spontaneous fermentation - Origin of fermented foods are likely to be spontaneous fermentation in raw foods. Fruits, vegetables, cereal, meat and milk contain a large variety of bacteria, yeasts and molds, and given the right environmental conditions, spontaneous fermentation will start.
Controlled by temperature, water activity, sugar concentration, and salt.
 
Back-slopping – sample of a successful fermentation is saved to be used as inoculum for the subsequent fermentations. The microbial composition will vary over time and the quality of fermented food will still show batch to batch variation. This system is robust and complete failures are relatively rare.
 
Commercial Starter Cultures – standardised inoculum for manufacturers, allows the food producer to maintain control over the production process and minimalize failures
 

